We've gotta get you in your moment in the sun on live.
Yeah. You got live. I'm not talking
to on Live Ross, Mr. Chin.
No, no. This is, this is on the news later on.
Throwing yourself from the dp. Yep. Okay.
Are we, are we that technology is all good? Yes. Yep.
Okay. Welcome Cam. Oh,
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Have you here. And I won't hold you up
'cause I see you've got a very busy agenda.
So, um, uh, thank you for having me
and, uh, allowing this opportunity
after the initial briefing.
Um, can I also thank Maritime New Zealand
and all the officials, uh, who are,
who have been providing advice and, uh,
and we'll continue to provide advice.
This has got huge support
and, uh, I, I know there's a lot of definitions
that have gotta be sorted
and understood, uh, and made clear.
But ultimately, let's not forget
that over about 85% of the 155
submissions supported the intent of this bill.
Uh, it, it got, um, support across the house as we know,
uh, strong support
and, uh, the water safety sector groups, uh, such
as water safety, New Zealand, drowning Prevention, Auckland,
coast Guard, uh, and,
and the likes, um, all want us, uh, to progress this bill.
Um, they all see it as a key component
and, um, arguably one of the last components
to reducing our, uh, drowning rate.
And, um, ultimately, they'd also like this committee,
as you'd see in their written submissions,
and you'll hear from them verbally as well, uh,
to explore widening the scope, um,
to all New Zealanders.
Frankly, this bill just codifies what's already in place.
It codifies what new most New Zealanders.
And if you talk at your own,
in your own circles about making life jackets compulsory
for kids, most people will say, aren't they already?
And, uh, so it codifies what most Bois already doing, it
what most families are already doing,
what the public expects, what New Zealanders when polled
by different water safety groups, uh, want, uh,
so you are on the, uh, if this, uh, progresses in part
or whole, uh, or is extended, um, you are on the side
of the public and the water safety groups here, um, as,
as has been put this, this is, uh, an opportunity, um,
to make the, uh, national rule catch up with, to,
to ensure the national rule catches up with what, uh,
most regional councils already have in place.
We've got a situation where the national rule, uh,
is more permissive, uh, than the, than the, um,
regional rules in, in most instances, as you can see, uh, in
that, uh, graph that you've, in that picture
that you've got, um, where that is the, that is the look
of inconsistency, the yellow.
It's those that are following the national rule,
and that is that you must just have life jackets on board.
And that look, looking at it probably is 20, 30%
of the country, majority of the country, um, uh, has,
has a stronger rule than that,
but ultimately still leave it up to skipper discretion.
And, uh, uh, this will put a nationwide rule in place
and make the expectations, uh, very, very clear nationwide.
Um, yes, there are issues that you'll have to look at
around definitions as you've already, uh,
started to explore.
And, um, they are, I'll just touch on them, uh,
and you'll be aware of them already,
but underway, the definition is that, uh,
a vessel must be underway, um, for life jackets,
uh, to be put on.
Um, children that are under 15 on boats that are,
or recreational crafted are less than six meters.
Uh, flotation, personal flotation devices,
PFDs versus life jackets.
The life jacket bill is obviously a lot more colloquial,
understandable, uh, uh, um, to,
and marketable to New Zealanders.
But as officials have said, um, p PFDs,
personal flotation devices as that picture just showed, uh,
are, are covered off in the definition of, um,
of the maritime rule, uh, 91.
So, so, um, life jackets, I would certainly like to see
that term kept there is if only, um, as long
as the personal flotation devices, the appropriate ones
as Maritime New Zealand have, have, um, articulated,
remain in place and are covered off.
So if you're wearing an acceptable PFD, you're not going
to be, uh, denied, uh, legality on that.
Um, exempted craft, uh, that's something
that let's not forget that this bill, uh,
is probably a decade in the making
and there's been a lot of change with technologies.
Um, you know, there's foil boards, there's all sorts
of things that people might be out on the water with now
that weren't with when this, um, definition, uh,
when this bill was drafted.
And this bill arguably needs to probably catch up
with the changing and consolidation of the maritime rules.
Um, so, so it knits in tightly
and reflects what's, um, what's reflected in, uh, rule 91,
um, uh, the exempted Craft again.
Uh, yeah, check out that, uh, definition scope is,
I think probably the most, one of the most important things.
And one of the things that you'll hear again
and again from submissions, uh,
and the Water Safety Sector group, is it time
for all New Zealanders, uh, to be wearing life jackets,
mandatory life jackets, um, on, on craft, uh,
six meters or less, not just children.
And, um, uh, that is something that you will, uh,
need to explore.
That is something that ultimately,
perhaps your caucuses need to explore.
But I would argue that, um, most people think that
that's already in place
and most people, uh, already put it in place.
And so, um, uh, also as, as officials said that, oh,
what about accessing cost of life jackets?
Well, remember that the national rule, now,
the default position is that life jackets have
to be carried on board.
So arguably no one's having to race out
and get life jackets.
If they find themselves in that position, they,
they're already, um, breaking the rule
because they need to have life jackets, uh,
or PFDs on, on board, uh, access to them.
Uh, there's life jacket hubs, sport white Tuckery, and,
and Massey and my electorate, for example, um,
provides a life jacket hub.
There's a lot of community organizations
and community funding that supports life jackets, uh,
to make them accessible and affordable.
Um, uh, the concern about criminalizing, um, parents,
and, uh, this is again, something that you need to look at
as far as the Maritime New Zealand and Coast Guard
and other, other people will say they see this primarily
as an education tool.
They are not going to be overzealously, um, uh,
going out there chasing people,
and frankly, they haven't got the resources
to try and find them.
Uh, but it will set a standard like we saw
with swimming pool fences, uh, in the early nineties,
and the dramatic effect that they had when they were put up,
like we saw with, uh, cycle helmets like we saw
with seat belts, like we saw
with drunk driving New Zealanders, a a, uh, uh, you know,
a a quick adapters.
And, uh, this bill finally, um, members,
this bill will give us a nationwide consistent rule.
It'll codify what people think is already in place,
and it will ensure, uh, that lives are saved
as has been articulated.
Perhaps it's people, Mr.
Chairman, like our demographic age
and stage, that, that are, uh, particularly males that are,
are drowning, uh, more so than children, but
nonetheless, children are drowning.
And so this bill, uh, will save lives,
there's no doubt about that.
And, uh, I think we owe it to our children, uh,
to have them in life jackets
and for that expectation to be very, very clear
and consistent across the country.
So, thank you, and good luck with your analysis
and your deliberations.
Thank you, Cameron. Really appreciate that. Um, questions
Of the He.
Well, thank you. Um, I, um, was thinking about
how these bills that we bring forward as members bills,
they don't have a cost associated with 'em
as a necessary part of things,
but your bill seems to me to be one
that's very dependent on a really good, um,
education campaign.
Have you thought about the realities of that
and what you need, what you expect in terms of
backing for this bill, if we are gonna change
the norms in our society?
So this is an expectation. Mm-hmm.
Well, and I think you'll see,
and that is a, that is a, uh, good question, uh, Helen,
as far as, um, the water safety sector groups
and the roles that they play in, in education as well.
And I think you will see,
and there's been joint letters signed
and submissions that are, uh, you know, uh, that, that are,
uh, reflecting each other's, uh, sentiment about the need
for this to, to progress.
Uh, I think you will see a willingness across those water
safety sector groups to come together and help fund
and help lead a water safety campaign,
which reinforces this new rule when it takes if
and when it takes effect.
And I'm talking again, drowning prevention, New Zealand,
coast Guard Water Safety, New Zealand, uh, life Skills,
New Zealand, and the, and, and the likes.
And so they, they are already working collectively,
and they have been on this, uh, reaction to the bill.
And, uh, I put it to you
that you ask them a question, are they prepared?
Have they got the resources that if this bill was to pass,
can it be promoted and can safety continue to be promoted?
Thank you. Mm-hmm. Okay, thanks.
Um, you said, um, a couple of questions from me.
First of all, you said this bill's been a decade in the
making, so it's presumably had a number
of parents whilst what's the, what's the process been
that it's, um, it's been through to get to this point?
Oh, thank you. Yes. Well, it's, um,
it was a private members bill that, uh, Alfred Naro, uh,
former national Listing p um, uh, put together again, um,
last decade, not this.
And then, uh, and then when he left Parliament, it went to,
uh, Simon Watts as the sponsor.
Simon picked it up again as someone on the North Shore
with a, uh, you know, a water edge to his electorate.
And so it made sense for Simon to pick it up
and, um, he led it.
And then, uh, when he was promoted into cabinet, um,
he approached me and said, would you like
to now be sponsor of this bill?
Um, because of being an upper harbor
and the likes in, in Auckland.
And, um, so that is the, that is the, uh, journey
that this bill's been on only, only last year was it drawn
after sitting in the balance, obviously the lucky one.
But, uh, this is an opportunity for us, you know, to,
as a private members bill, because
as a government bill, it might not succeed.
Yeah. So look, my other question, uh, there,
and that's is has it changed in any
way over that period of time?
No, but as I alluded to Mr.
Chairman, um, because of the changing technologies
and water habits
and float, uh, the, uh, the development of PFDs
and the different water sports and the length of six meters
and how that's defined, is it a water
line length or what is it?
Um, they all need to be challenged
because you're looking at a bill that probably needs
to catch up, not only with today's trends, uh,
but with the changing maritime
rules in the last decade as well.
Yeah, no, no, thank you. That's, that's, that's useful.
Um, the other question I've got for you is just in terms
of the, you asked that scope question, uh,
we will obviously ask the scope question as to
how far we go, but I would imagine we might have got a
different set of submissions
and reactions if we were to say, look, we think this ought
to be extended to a wider mm-hmm.
A wider audience, you know, to, to over fifteens.
Um, you would agree with that?
Y yes. Look, that is something
that is not within the bill.
And so, but you will hear your,
you will hear the Water Safety Sector groups
and others promoting that, that concept, uh, I've tested it
as far as the business committee process,
because it's titled so tightly as the Life Jackets
for Children and Young Persons Bill.
Uh, if, if you were to scope it beyond that title,
does it render it useless?
There is precedence, I understand from the clerk's office
that, um, when you widen it broader than its title in scope,
that if there is enough agreement in the business committee,
it can, it can be changed. Mm-hmm.
It's, it's sort of thing
that is a matter of natural justice.
You might sort of argue, you then have to go out
and ask for more submissions.
Um, yeah. Um, the, the other question, uh, the other part of
that is, um, you have just said wearing life jackets.
There's a lot of these, um, uh, the,
when you look at the map there, um, a lot
of 'em are about being underway.
And I'm thinking of the situation, for example, you, you're,
you're sitting there, you, you're, um, you're not moving,
you're, you say fishing, for example.
Mm-hmm. Um, whether you still think it should apply in
that situation where the vessel is not underway. Mm-hmm.
Well, that, that, again,
and people have said, what about if we're sleeping on a
small craft or, and whatnot?
And, um, but underway is a,
is a relatively clear definition,
but again, like all these definitions,
there's always room at the edges.
And so that is that they are scenarios, Mr.
Chair, that you'll have to put to the officials as to,
you know, in this situation, if people have stopped the boat
and, uh, fishing, uh, or diving off
and swimming, uh,
do they still need to be in their life jacket?
So that is something that can be easily contested and,
and, uh, easily answered. I
Wonder why, again, I thank you for that.
Other questions, Tracy?
Um, just going back to the long history of the bill, um,
I think it was mentioned somewhere that, um,
obviously it's almost got there,
or this is about to have been a move on several occasions,
but government priorities have overtaken.
Are there anything specific, um, that you're aware of, um,
that would prohibit progressing?
Um, are there any unresolved sort of tensions
between government priorities
and this bill that you're aware of that we could look at
during this process to prevent
That from happening again?
Yeah, well, I suppose ultimately, thank you, um, Tracy, I,
I suppose ultimately would have to be put by caucus memos
to different caucuses.
And if you were as a committee
to promote it being broadened, then, uh, that,
that would be a discussion that that, uh, would be had
by caucuses to see if it had that level of support.
And so I would encourage you, if you were
to start going down the track of broadening its scope, uh,
to talk with your, some of your senior colleagues
and say, do you think this would carry in our caucuses?
I'm confident that a majority, uh,
of mps would support a broadening scope.
But, uh, again, selection year, let's see.
But there's no encumbrances
that I know other than if the scope was broadened,
that could raise some issues.
Uh, as, as chairman has said, as far as, does that, does
that mean that you go out re out for submissions?
Does that broaden it too far that you have to,
that you dunno if you've got the public with you or not?
Um, but, uh, there, there are no encumbrances from
what I can see as it is, um, from it progressing.
But if the scope was broadened, then
that would probably open another discussion. Yeah.
Right. I don't see any other questions.
I just wanted to ask your, um, obviously there's a process
that we've gotta go through, um, what you, uh,
personally want to do in terms of your engagement
with the processes we go through Conscious,
you've also got other commitments. Yeah. But, um, no,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll,
How would you like to handle that? Oh,
well, I'll, I'll leave it over to the Transport
and Infrastructure, uh, committee.
You've got a bunch of very, uh, experienced mps here,
and I'll just take a watching brief
and I wish you well for your, um, oral submissions.
I'll, I'll try and come in where some
of the big sector groups are, are coming in
and, and presenting.
And I look forward to, um, uh, you know, how you, um,
as you start reporting back to Parliament and how it looks,
and ultimately, wouldn't it be great if it was to progress
to heaven play, uh, by summer 26, 27?
Mm-hmm. But obviously the, the, it's, it's got,
it's a tight legislative program
and, uh, private members bills often, uh, play second fiddle
to the agenda of the day. Yeah.
Look, thank you. And we'll keep you informed that,
you know, as the progress as we go through
and, um, look forward to your further contributions.
Yeah. All the best. Thank you for your Cameron. Thank you.
And thank you. Um, thank you officials. Um, so
In the zoom, but I understand we've got other signals.
Okay. We're five minutes ahead of time anyway.
Great. Yeah, so if anyone hear further gas emissions,
um, we can come, we
Might just, we got officials coming
for this one too, uh, yeah. To listen in,
And then they'll be back in the afternoon for,
um, any questions committee. Right.
Okay.
So we, so at the moment we're trying to,
trying to find Ross, are we?
Yes. Um, but we, I think meeting association we'll get,
We'll just check, see, see. Right.
Uh, welcome everyone.
We've our first, um, submitter is online, uh,
so we're just trying to get, um, get them at the moment.
Uh, and then just to check who we've got here,
we've got the New Zealand Home Heating Association.
Cool. And then we've got plumbers and gas fitters, uh,
and drain layers board.
Yes. Yep. Thank you. And master plumbers, gas fitters,
drain layers, New Zealand outside, go outside.
We can encourage 'em to come in if they want to. Right.
Okay. Uh, and I think that gets us to,
and then some of you are, most of you are here
to do a second, a second, sorry, uh, later on.
Uh, but we don't have the ones,
the other two in the second crack do either.
Okay. Right. Okay. Right. How are we going?
Um, no, Like, okay.
We don't get him by, we get him in the next three minutes.
He's on otherwise at the home meeting, um,
association first.
So just bear in mind, you might be
pulled up slightly early if you're good for that.
Right. We are running a few minutes here. We are.
We, that's why I'm gonna give him, I'm gonna give him till,
um, ten two, which is future time if he's, he's there.
If he's there. So you've got, you've
got, you've got a minute.
Although if he turns up early Yeah. You know. Yeah.
So, yeah. Yeah.
Okay. Yep. Definitely not gonna be starting early
whilst committee
organization for 10 minutes.
Um, we've got your submission, which you can take, uh,
as rare, but if you wanna highlight anything
in it, that's great.
Um, and if you wanna leave us some time
for questions, that's also good.
I'll, I'll give you a call if you're still talking,
I'll give you a call at four minutes to go, uh, just to say,
um, we would like some question time, probably. No
Worries. Okay.
Your time now. Okay.
So, um, Jason Hague Smith on behalf
of New Zealand Home Heating, uh, committee.
Um, thanks for hearing, hearing us.
Uh, we've obviously sent our submission in what you've read,
and, uh, I believe, uh,
the clarification has already been made,
but we thought we'd just put our phase two do an
oral submission as well.
Uh, just to, basically for points of clarity,
uh, that's what we're looking at.
Um, New Zealand Home Heating obviously, uh,
represents the specialist solid fuel heating sector.
And we're here talking about risk, competency, and clarity.
Um, so the installations involved elevated fire
and life safety risk, um,
and which is why they've historically sat under tighter
specialist compliance control.
So the, the main main point, our position is, uh,
we're asking for the express exclusion
of solid fuel heating appliances from the plum itself
certification scheme.
And I believe that's, uh, already happened.
Um, and if,
and if it hasn't, uh, for the clarity, we just wanted
to make sure that that was, um,
understood being such a specialist.
Uh, thing, um, my background, um,
it is, uh, I've been 35 years in the home heating industry.
Um, and, uh, it's quite scary.
Uh, the, the more you know,
the more you realize that you didn't know.
And I say that in a, in the context of, um,
if we go down the track of, uh, allowing, um,
self-certification for, um, non
fully trained, uh, entities, we could also have, um,
some significant situations that would be adverse
to New Zealand home owners.
Um, so what the bill, uh, could change
and why it matters, um,
even if consents remain self-certification removes an an
essential independent safety check.
Um, we understand
that the building consents would be still required under the
proposed amendments, however,
unless explicitly excluded plumbers may be allowed
to self-certify in place of a final BCA inspection.
Um, so some of this, what I'm saying, it could be, um,
uh, maybe, maybe, uh, uh, non necessary
because the submission's already been acknowledged,
but I just thought since I'm here, keep outlining.
Um, so it's a critical safety control.
This, this inspection.
It's not just administrative, it's, it's, um,
it's a critical safety control.
The, the amount of, um, fireplaces
that I personally get to see, uh,
within the Wellington City area,
welling city council ring me, um, uh,
to inspect certain jobs that we haven't been part of.
Uh, and it's, it's, uh, it's quite eye watering.
Uh, and, uh, yeah, significant
in competency has been, has been done by, uh, people
who are very good at their trades.
Um, but they haven't specialized in this aspect.
Um, so, um, this is also not,
not plumber bashing.
Uh, a lot of my friends are plumbers.
You use that old adage.
My son's a plumber, hopefully they're still friends,
they're still, they're still friends.
Uh, my son's a training, uh, training plumber.
Um, and so this is, this is not trying plumber bashing
by any stretch of the imagination.
This is, this is purely trying to outline how,
how serious this, uh, industry of specific to me.
I'm not talking about, um, plumbers work specific to, to me
and the board and New Zealand home heating, uh, that, um,
the competency of installations need to be under a,
a certain umbrella currently by way of, uh,
council inspections.
It's not general building work.
Um, it's complex, it's high risk.
Um, and a lot of, uh, failures are latent to the world.
Um, like it's, it's all behind the walls.
So we, we need to, um, make sure that, uh, it is,
it is really, um, followed through.
And currently, even though there's holes in the current
system, um, it, uh, it, it seems to be on a whole,
uh, working, um, but we see areas that can be improved.
Um, New Zealand home heating, uh, has obviously the,
uh, recognized compliance under the as NZS 2 9 1 8.
Um, and the manufacturer, uh, must obviously adhere to that,
so must the installer.
Um, and, um, it has training, uh,
which is specific, uh, to that, uh,
appliance also risk focused
talks about all sorts of different things.
So, um, this is also not necessarily to bat
for New Zealand home heating, uh,
but it, it is an entity that takes
specifically this industry of New Zealand, sorry, uh, wood,
wood fire appliances, um, as a specialist field.
So it's, it's something that we've, um, that we have a,
uh, a clear direction on.
Um, so to allow for, um, some questions.
I thought I'd, I'd skip a couple of pages
'cause I think you've read everything.
I don't want to insult your intelligence.
Um, so closing, um, this is about protecting life
property and confidence in the system.
Uh, wood burners are a specialist high risk
installation category.
Existing compliance systems are effective
and well understood.
The proposed scheme is drafted,
unintentionally weakens those protections.
So that's, we, we just wanted to highlight that.
Um, and really just wanted to re reaffirm, uh,
that New Zealand Home Heating urges the committee
to act decisively
and exclude solid fuel heating appliances from
this particular self-certification scheme.
Okay. Thank you.
Um, I'm gonna ask a couple questions that
Simon and then Arina.
So the first one just in, in the
officials can nod on this one.
So what you're saying is you've made the submission,
you said, Hey, please exclude this,
you've got acknowledgement.
You said Yes, that is, that that's, yes.
That's been taken on board.
I just wanna check that that is, so we, so what you've asked
for is gonna be done in terms of the, the recommendations
that are coming back and sort of getting the nod from back.
Yes. Okay. So that's good stuff. Okay.
Um, second question, can you just ask, can you just, um,
clarify what are wool burners?
And I, I know, you know, I know
what a wool burner looks like, generally speaking,
just how broad is that?
I mean, it's o it's open fire in that.
Yeah, correct. Correct. So anything with a solid fuel, uh,
as in, uh, wood, so
Not gas, the fuel, anything with a solid fuel.
Yep. Correct. Uh, that's what we look after.
Uh, so that includes open fires, space heaters, um, anything
with it with, that you put wood in as the fuel source.
That includes pallet fires as well. Uh, that has, yeah.
That, that energy sources derived from, from wood.
Okay. Cool. Right. Um, who's nz?
Um, H-A-A-H-H-A, I presume
that's a broader association umbrella.
And there's a number of different, um, entities
that sit underneath that.
Yeah. So New Zealand Home Heating, uh,
I'm on the executive board.
Yes. Uh, that, um, has installers, uh, retailers
and manufacturers on the board.
Yep. Uh, it's a board that, uh, has looked
after for, for quite some time, some decades.
Uh, the, the industry of solid fuel heating
and trying to, um, drive further installation, um,
clarity, safety, uh, it gets testing done, um,
and it has adhered to
and helped write the 2 9 8 2 9 1 8 standard.
So, so, so the, um, uh,
N-Z-H-H-A is effectively the expert in the country,
or representative of the expertise Correct.
E expertise in the country. Yeah.
Which takes me to, my last part of my question was you said
that the, the w ccc, the local council in this case, um,
has, um, obviously asked you on a regular basis to go
and have a look at, um, installations and go, hang on.
That doesn't look very good. Um, so you are in effect,
I mean, the whole thing of having, um,
if you've got a building inspector, for example,
would you respect to building inspectors?
I'm not gonna bash them any more than you
bash didn't bash plumbers.
Um, but they're not gonna have the spec specific expertise
in terms of, so installed a, a solid, um,
wood fire, they will get someone like yourself to do
that inspection, check that it's done.
They won't just roll out the,
the ordinary building inspector to
Do that. Well,
no, the ordinary,
we don't use that term that we've used. The,
The, the, this, this, the building, the
Regular, so the, the building inspector will, will come in
and sign it off and see it.
Yeah. That's where, that's where I say the current system is
mostly effective.
Yeah. But it still has some holes. Yeah.
It does come down to individual competency.
And so that's where we think with the training program
that New Zealand Home Heating has in place
and the regulation that we adhere to,
and we've got a disciplinary board
that if things aren't correct, the either the councils
or individual homeowners can come to us
and, um, they can ask us to have a look at
that installation as a, as a board.
So, so yes,
an individual council inspector doesn't have the same level
of expertise as one of our members,
however, they've got an entire board
and membership that we can tap into to go
and check if, if they feel
Need. So they can call on you
db I'm gonna take two quick
questions, Simon, and then Ena. Okay.
Uh, thanks Jason. Look, it's been great to be able
to engage with your members at various home shows
around the country over many years.
And, um, we'll also be able to attend, uh,
your organization's, uh, annual,
your conference in in Chicago, uh, just to hear about some
of the horror stories that question your members
Showcased. Simon, question please.
So
I'm wondering, would you just be able to,
for the benefit of the committee, Mr.
Chair, just identify some of those, uh, very serious risks
that your members have picked up in inspections, uh,
where work has not been undertaken to the right standard?
Uh, well en numerous, um,
flus upside down where, uh, creo soaps can, can then escape
outside the joints
and then cause combustion on top of the fire.
Um, incorrect flu sizing.
Uh, we've got one in in Wellington that I just went to see.
And so a plumber had knocked down a chimney, uh, once again,
this is not plumber bashing,
but this was something just happened last week.
Um, knocked down a chimney
and put in a, an insufficient size, uh, flu, which can then,
um, uh, not make, not allow the fireplace to work correctly.
Mm. Um, and, uh, I've, I've had, uh,
opened up walls
and, uh, the, the, uh, no, no heat clearance, uh, cell, uh,
had been used and all the walls were chart.
Um, and, uh, I had another one where recently, end
of last year, we went there, did, did the consult.
And I said to the homeowner, please don't use your fire.
She said, I haven't used it for a couple of years.
And she goes, why? And I said, well, if you use that, um,
the, the house will go up and, and smoke,
because the builder in this case had, um, done a reroof
and a new ceiling line, and he'd removed the liners
and just had a flu going through.
Oh, okay. So there's that, that,
that's just scratching the surface.
We've, we've got so many where, uh,
there's been a brand new fire
and the heat cell was in the skip
and, um, the, the, the,
just the raw fire casing was put into a timber frame.
Um, those kinds of things wouldn't
or shouldn't happen if it was done with a fully trained,
competent New Zealand home heating member.
So the, these are things that are not anomalies.
These, these are things that are happening all the time.
Um, and when we, when we, uh, see these things, um,
of course we noted to all our members,
but it's not our members that are doing it. Thank you. Very
Helpful. No, that's really helpful.
Thank you, Jason.
Really appreciate it. Thank you
for the great work you're doing.
Obviously keeping a lot of people safe.
No problem. Saving lives
One day.
Well done. Good stuff. Thank you. Good stuff. Thank you.
Right. Okay. We still don't have, um,
we still don't have Ross Wakefield who I understand is,
um, traveling somewhere.
So we may get, we may pick 'em up later on to see
how we go into, right, right.
Um, we now have plumbers and gas fitters drain lands board.
So Elena,
give them a free hit, Mr.
Chair or fireplace
and well, I'm sure that, uh, they're going over here to say
what, what they wanna say.
So right free hit okay. Right.
We've got you down forward 10 minutes again.
Um, and, um, look forward to hearing what you've got.
Say, I'll again give you a call about things. Wonderful.
If we have got questions at that point.
Thank you. Um, so my name's Elena,
and I'm the chief executive
and registrar of the plumber's gas medicine drain Nabo.
And sitting beside me as Martin Dega,
who is the chair of the board.
Um, we just wanna quickly kind of set out the scene in terms
of how we operate and what our role is,
because we think that that's really important, um, in terms
of the self-certification regime.
So our primary role is to protect public health and safety,
and we have a number of mechanisms
as to how we go about doing it.
The first is registering practitioners,
and that means that we are making sure
that they have the right qualifications
to enter into the trades.
The second is we have yearly license renewals.
We respond to concerns about work, which may need
that we investigate,
or the, um, more serious end of the scale is
that we are laying a charge against those practitioners
for defective work.
We deliver annual continuing professional development,
and we raise public awareness about the need
to engage a licensed and competent practitioner.
And we are often confused with master plumbers,
which is Greg who is sitting behind me.
We are not the membership association.
So I just wanna make that point really clear.
Our role here is to protect public health and safety.
Um, again, it's not protecting consumers interests,
so just making that distinction really clear.
So we've been asked
to operationalize this self-certification regime within a
very short period of time, the success of the scheme
and public confidence.
And it really depends on getting the fundamentals right
and ensuring the board has adequate powers, uh, to act
as this effective gatekeeper.
So to act as that gatekeeper, we intend
to set up an eligibility, um, requirements
to allow practitioners to obtain the endorsement
that then will go and be attached to their license.
So that includes holding the certified registration class.
This is the highest class of registration
that our practitioners can hold.
That means it won't be open to all practitioners
to enter into this regime.
They will have had to have sit
and passed the board certifying registration, uh, exam
to be able to, um, enter into the regime.
Certifying practitioners are responsible for ensuring
that their work is done safely and competently.
And importantly, compliantly.
Uh, a plumber gas fitter
or drain layer has to have their work, uh, checked
and approved by a certifying practitioner.
The second requirement to enter into this regime is
that they must be a fitted and proper person.
So we check that annually,
and they are required to disclose to us if there's anything
that may impact on their ability to hold a license,
which includes things like criminal convictions
that may be relevant to, um,
a practitioner entering into a home, for example.
Uh, the third requirement will, will be
that they hold appropriate insurance, um,
that provides cover for defective work.
Uh, so as we've stated in our written submission,
we do not have the expertise
and the resources to be reviewing each single individual
practitioner's insurance.
So it will be done on a, um, trust basis.
They will need to declare that they hold
that relevant insurance, um, to cover themselves
and obviously the homeowner.
Um, the fourth requirement is
that they must complete training, um,
and they must pass that training.
So that is going to include things like liability,
under self certification, insurance expectations,
and dispute resolution pathways.
So that's the, the entry, um, if you like, in terms
of us being a gatekeeper into how they will be able
to enter into the south certification regime.
Um, that's obviously going to be set up by the regulations,
uh, in terms of enabling us to allow us to do that.
So quickly, turning to our submissions,
we have really three key points that we want to address.
Um, the audit powers the scope of work
and the timeframe that we are operating to.
Um, and Martin will talk to you about the scope of work.
Um, as I've said, the board is frequently referred to being
as the gatekeeper for this regime.
Uh, the legislation is currently drafted
and that this is really important, only permits the board
to undertake a desktop audit of certificates
of compliance compliance.
So the board does not consider that this will be sufficient
to allow it to act as an effective gatekeeper.
It does not allow us
to order the eligibility requirements we've just set out.
It would need to be extended to allow the board
to not only order certificates of compliance,
but also order practitioners compliance
with the eligibility requirements outlined above.
And we consider that we'd need wider audit powers
to conduct in-person audits when necessary,
which would mean access to premises
and records where appropriate.
Um, for example, checking a drain before it was enclosed.
If we had concerns about a practitioner's competence,
that would be really difficult for the board
to be an effective, effective gatekeeper if it can only do
desktop audits, which is looking at
the certificate of compliance.
Um, the other really important tool
that the board is missing to be this effective gate keeper
as the ability to require a practitioner
to undertake a competency review.
Um, the board has the ability to order a practitioner
We do not have any empowering provision.
So our legislation says, um, Martin, I'd like you
to undertake a competency review
because I have concerns about your competency to practice.
Paul Martin, Paul Martin, I was checking on him.
He says, no thanks Elena.
I'm not going to participate in that.
And I have to say, okay, thank you very much.
So we are really limited in terms of us actually being able
to assess and make findings
and recommendations around a practitioner's competence.
That power is, you're gonna hear from me again,
and second submissions that power, we believe is a necessity
to allow us to be this effective gatekeeper.
The second point I wanna talk about is just the timeframe
that we are operating to, to have this
regime set up and running.
Um, we will deliver to this timeframe, um,
but we do think that it's prudent just to raise
with this committee that any delays
regarding the development
of the regulations will absolutely impact on us being able
to set up this regime by 30th of June.
Um, this is primarily
because we have obviously obligations to consult, um,
with our practitioners around any fees
and levies that we are going to set.
The, the regulations will feed into
what our audit powers are and to what that fee
and levy will look like.
And the regulations also feed into the database
that we are building at speed
and the changes that we are making to our existing database.
Once we have consulted, then we also have
to get these notices gazed
and to do that within this timeframe.
If the regulations are delayed, we'll,
we'll severely impact, um, on us having this regime set up.
I also just wanna say, it would be really remiss of me not
to raise it with the committee that there's a real missed
opportunity here to look at amendments to the plumbers,
gas fitters and drain layers Act.
It hasn't been reviewed in 20 years.
Our definitions in terms of what sanitary plumbing,
drain laying and gas fitting are well outta date
and haven't kept up with, um, technology and changes.
So Martin's going to talk
to you just really briefly about the scope of work. You've
Only got about three minutes left, so
Sorry. Okay. Um,
so firstly, the board is a hundred percent
behind getting this up and running.
Um, and yet we wanna talk about the scope,
the certifiable part of the work, um,
and the non certifiable
or the high risk work, which is gonna be identified in the,
in the, um, uh,
the regulation.
Regulation, sorry, um, will be the breaking
or the success of this.
So it's really important that we get good understanding of
what the intention is.
The intention is to get as many set, um, simple
or certifiable work able
to be self certified under the scheme.
And therefore, and,
and rural areas especially, we need to make sure that, um,
the high risk items are, are managed by the BCAs,
and then the, the general part of the work is able
to be certified by the self certifiers.
An example of this at the moment is, uh,
a bathroom alteration.
We have to get a consent to do the told membrane
behind the shower, yet all the other work is currently done,
um, by the plumbers themselves without any consent
or self-certification.
Essentially, they take ownership of that work through
to the legislation that we work under now.
So there's already examples that part works can be done
by the BCAs
and the rest of the work can be done, um,
under self-certification.
So for example, if you have multi dwellings, um,
it's really beneficial for the drainer to be able
to close up that drain as he goes to allow better
and safer access to the sites.
Uh, there might be a weather ency coming, um,
where they want to close it up at the moment they have,
wait, it's not gonna be time for questions at
all, so, so, okay.
Uh, I'll make sure. But they basically have to wait
until the inspections done, and that is the real benefit
of this scheme where they can just get on and do the work
and the timeframe and that needs to be,
and then it's signed off at the end.
So, yeah. Okay.
We've got about 40 seconds for questions.
So has anybody got one?
I Don't know. Um, who is responsible then for
the consumer part of, um, the, the competency checks.
I'm not talking about consumer advocacy here,
but, um, be a reticence
to have a more active role in the insurance checks and,
and more appetite for taking on more
of the competency checks, which makes sense
and for your place in the industry.
But who does that, given that you have a number
of members coming here get an insurance product
that is appropriate for what you're asking me to do?
We don't have members, so we Oh, sorry,
sorry. So that would be more,
You, you'll have people that you won't see.
So in terms of consumer protections, in terms
of there is effective
Work, if you and says, I can't get the insurance product
that you're asking me to get, what do you do?
Then they can't participate
In, they can't participate in the regime.
What if it's everyone That
Would, that's ultimately the,
the successful failure of the scheme.
So, well, we need to make
sure that this product's available.
And I mean, we have insurance cover now for gas fitters,
gas fitters do this now.
So this is just an extension from that.
So there are insurances in place.
Cool. Thank you. Really appreciate that.
Don't have time for any more questions,
unfortunately, but really appreciate that.
Thank you. Right. Okay.
Get straight on to, um, the master plumbers.
Um, so yeah, thank you.
Um, and Ross Wakefield apparently is online.
So what I'm gonna do, we've got a five minute buffer at
10 25, so I'm gonna drop 'em in there.
You can let him know, let him know.
You can let him know we've drop enough as well. Thanks.
Right. Give him my mind. So can get it. Good. Right. Okay.
Again, take it as red and we've got you down for 10 minutes
and, um, your time starts now.
I will tell you what, um, four minutes to go.
Tina Kato Kato chair
and uh, members of the committee thank you
for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Greg Wallace and I'm CEO
of Master plumbers New Zealand.
With me on my left is Lisa Oman,
master plumbers advocacy support to my right Josh Harris,
operations manager of Jason Brown Plumbing Basin in
Wellington, and a certify plumber and gas fitter. Oh, well
Done. Master plumbers
today represents 70% plumbing gas fitting
and drain line sector with over 3000 employees under
our business membership.
Master plumbers welcomes the intent
behind the self-certification scheme for plumbers and drains
and supports the efforts
to make the consenting process more efficient
and housing more affordable for New Zealanders.
In 2013, more than 14 years ago,
gas fitting in New Zealand was granted the ability to self,
self certify their work without any restrictions.
We've been advocating for four years for pumps
and drain laws to have this process as well.
Frustratingly MB has made
what we call a simple process complex.
Mm-hmm. The bill is a shadow of what we hope for,
and we're concerned that practitioners won't opt in
for three key reasons.
The proposed regulations exclude too much routine,
common low risk plumbing
and drain it confusing the exemptions
of Schedule one and the recently introduced granny flat
legislation and the opt-in framework is well too cumbersome.
I'm now gonna hand over to Josh,
who's an experienced plumber who has practical experience.
I give some examples.
Uh, thanks Greg. So, as Greg said, the bill
excludes way too much of the routinely done work
that we carry out on a day-to-day BA basis.
Um, so much so that a lot of the people I've talked to,
uh, feeling the same as us, that it's not gonna be worth
actually joining the scheme
because there's so much exclusion.
Um, it seems to me
that the old bill has basically become undermined
by its own red tape and regulations.
Um, so some examples are the routine onsite systems.
So rainwater tanks and gray water supply.
Um, the majority of those have pumped systems
and a lot of them are required by a lot of the BCAs
for any kind of building consent, you are adding, um,
surface area that's not grass or trees.
Um, so the majority of those are gonna be excluded.
Um, any
of the work on commercial premises is currently
completely excluded.
So basic bathrooms and kitchens
and kindergarten schools, uh, retail stores on main street
and trading workshops,
it's just totally gone even though it's basic.
Um, the multiunit residential dwellings, uh,
they've brought in a couple
of extra regulations recently under the bill
that says you can do them,
but without the connection
to shared services also being there, it's kind of pointless.
The majority of those are not gonna be under,
under the self-certify.
So ending November 25,
there was 15,643 multi-unit dwellings consented compared
to 16,000 standalone houses.
So that's nearly 50% of the, uh,
residential dwellings.
Um, in terms of the consenting process,
the proposed process doesn't reflect at all
how things are done at the moment.
Um, we are generally not engaged
until the consent has already been lodged with council.
Um, and it's not gonna be realistic
for architects
and building companies to come to us first to get
that signed off except for large group homes, perhaps.
Um, it's gonna create an unrealistic obligation.
Um, and the main risk is probably the signature sales,
where you'll have a plumber signing off with no intention
of actually carrying out the work.
And it's something that the board's been actively, uh,
trying to get rid of on the guest side for many years.
Um, so would like a committee
to provide stronger direction over all of these.
Thanks Josh. And our second point is
regarding the confusion arising from consenting exemptions
allowable work and eligibility eligibility criteria
between the proposed self-certification scheme.
The existing granny flats in Schedule one, a large majority
of plumbers, gas fitters and drain layers are
certified in all three trades.
Uh, under the current settings,
the same person could face three different regulatory
pathways and multiple compliance documents
for very similar work.
We asked the committee to bring all consenting exemptions
for the PGD sector into alignment
to create a single combined form
for sanitary plumbing and drain laying work.
We also asked that the committee to bring gas fitting under
the PGD board to create consistent oversight
into simplify compliance.
To our third point, uh, we it as stands,
the opt-in framework is too cumbersome.
Um, eligibility requirements need to be practical.
Um, for some context, certified plumbers
and drain layers undertake seven years of training
that's longer than a medical degree,
making them more than competent.
And this is, we're talking the certifying level
as the board, uh, clarified earlier,
we believe eligibility should be limited
to three core, core criteria.
Certifying status, a clean disciplinary record,
and mandatory insurance.
That's public liability
and professional indemnity endorsement should sit
with the business, not the individual practitioner,
because consumers contract with the businesses
and insurance is held at that level.
So look, um, rather than to go on in summary,
the regulations do not meet what the bill's intention is.
And unless the the committee make changes to the regulation,
it is not gonna be a practical and working
and deliver affordable homes.
New Zealand's happy to answer any questions.
You imagine we've got just over four minutes.
I know, um, some of these questions it won't, uh,
we have skewed before and put before,
but, uh, can you summarize the top sort of five points
that you, the committee should be pushing back on the
initial cut of the bill? Uh,
So at the moment, as Josh pointed out, townhouses
and duplexes are a growth area for New Zealand.
With the re regulations currently in place,
they will be not included in self-certification,
which is just completely impractical.
The whole of ity coast will be ruled out
because they require gray water.
We should be encouraging gray water use. Right.
And that is a very simple system where we use storm water
to feed our toilet systems and laundries.
Right. We should be encouraging that use
and the regulations rule those out.
We've ruled out pumping systems, right?
Pumping systems are plug and pay.
Any of the committee could install a pump themself. Right.
And we are ruling
Don't, Don't, that's
Not a good idea. And
We we're making, um, like I said in 2013,
gas bids had no restrictions on self certified.
We are putting tremendous restriction on people
that do a seven year qualification.
I've got the three. Do you think the mandatory insurance
plus, um, who, who, who holds that as a disagreement I
Have with you, but, but tell us
More. Uh, so Master
plumber members all have
to prove their insurance, uh, liability, which is, uh,
public liability insurance.
Mm-hmm. We believe also indemnity insurance should be added
that covers, uh, plumbers
and drain laws when they're involved in design.
And often because the practicality of the architects means
that they are involved in some design systems,
Emity insurance will protect the consumers. Mm-hmm.
And we recommend a minimum of 5 million,
Oh sorry. Of
5 million. 5 million.
Right. Okay, cool. Elia,
Sweet. Two very quick
questions.
Firstly, so you think that by excluding solar water use,
uh, hot water use, um, gray water use
and on site storage
and pumping that, um,
this law discourage those more sustainable
practices as the bill stands? A hundred percent
Agree.
Secondly is, is a lot of this is talking about new builds
and that's a priority for us all to have new housing.
What about the work
that plumbers do when you go into an older house?
Um, because it's gonna be sold or
because, you know, people have just bought it and, but,
and they need a plumber to sort out
what is not certified now and never was
and it was done by, I dunno,
the homeowner's grandfather or something.
So under schedule one,
any plumber now can go into a bathroom,
move all the bathroom fixtures around, renovate them,
put new fittings and are not required under schedule one
to do a, a plumbing consent.
So we are self certify renovations.
We were not adding to the structure of the build.
It's the same with the green effects,
even if it wasn't correctly certified in the first place.
Correct. That's really
Interesting. So, so there
are some parts today of the program
that the regulations allow self-certification.
What we're doing is we're trying to extend that
to residential, but we're putting, uh,
cumbersome restrictions on that.
Mm-hmm.
Just reflecting on the submission for you, um, in terms
of the process to, you know, to get to certification,
et cetera, were you happy with all of that?
Uh, look, we've got a great relationship
with the regulator, which is probably a little bit unusual,
but, um, look, that is, it is a timeframe that is tight
for them, but these regulations need to be
Reviewed le leave the timeframe aside,
but the process of making sure that fit
and proper person, you've done the,
you've done all the training, et cetera, you're happy
with all of that, happy with that?
Yes. Okay. Good. Good, good. Any other questions?
No. Think you've given us a lot to think about.
Thank you. Okay.
And now we have and being on time, um, we have Ross,
um, Wakefield.
Ross, are you online there?
This is fine now.
Brilliant Ross. Thank you. I gather you were traveling
so weren't able to pick up the,
the call earlier, but good to have you there.
We've got your submission,
we've got your submission, which you can take as red.
Anything you wanna highlight? That's great.
You've got five minutes. I'll give you
a call with about two to go.
We do like to ask questions, um, so in your hands.
Yeah. Thank you chair and thank you committee for, um,
putting me in today
and for the opportunity to speak
my, um, my name's Ross Wakefield.
I've made my submission based on my practical experience
as a certifying plumber and drainer drain layer
and as a former building consent authority, plumbing
and drainage inspector for Wellington City Council
and a former, uh,
regulator at MB working the plumbing and drainage space.
And the feedback I put forward just relates to my concerns
around the self-certification proposal.
Um, I think there's some serious risks
with it undermining the public health protections
that the public rightly expect from
the building regulatory system.
I mean, plumbing and drainage
systems, they're, they're complex.
Even in a residential setting, these systems are hidden away
inside walls and ceilings and buried below grounds.
And there's often quite significant
consequences when they do fail.
And independent third party inspection,
that's a critical opportunity to check these systems
before they're buried or concealed.
So at the time of construction,
that's the only chance you will ever get
to see the whole plumbing and drainage system
before it's concealed.
Uh, during the construction process,
you'll never see the system again and its entirety.
Um, in most cases you'd have
to deconstruct the entire building.
So I think independent inspection really matters.
'cause these failures, they can cause contamination
of drinking water or they could cause scolding indu
injuries from hot water systems.
A one $5 fitting could break
and flood a building calling causing tens of thousands
of dollars worth of damage in a very short amount of time.
Um, drains can leak untreated surge into properties
or contaminate the environment.
And, and these are, these are high risk systems
'cause these defects are, are very hard
to see once they're concealed and where they arise from.
Um, so I think re there's a real risk
to removing independent inspections from
the building regulatory system.
It's a, it's a really key safeguard
that the system provides.
And if you look at comparable jurisdictions, Australia,
the UK and Canada, they don't allow self-certification
of plumbing and drainage for new homes.
They're not allowing plumbers
and drainers to sign it off themselves.
Um, I think the policy objectives to get faster builds,
I think that is unlikely to be achieved as a result
of having just the plumbing
and drainage elements able
to be self certified for a new house.
The building consent authorities will still be
reviewing the consented plans.
They'll still be looking at the plumbing
and drainage designs.
They'll be having discussions with the designer
to resolve any issues in those designs.
And they'll still be intending site for other inspections,
for all the building inspections.
And often when they're on site, the building inspections
and plumbing inspections in many cases are conducted
concurrently with the building inspections.
So I think there's limited time saving at all, um,
in the construction process for this policy.
Um, and as for lowering construction costs,
usually you'd have four, um, plumbing
and drainage inspections
for the construction of a new house.
They're about $200 each,
so you're probably spending $800 getting a building consent
authority to independently have a look over these systems
for a new home as they're being constructed.
So any savings you'd make about taking away the $800 you'd
pay as part of the building consent fees would be very
modest and are likely to be offset elsewhere on the system.
You'd likely to shift those costs through the costs of, um,
the plumbing, gasping and draining board, for example.
They're gonna have to have oversight
and audits of these tradies are gonna have
to have endorsements increase insurance,
there'll be paperwork costs
and, um, overall any of those costs will, they'll move on,
move around in the system and ultimately land on homeowners.
Um, for the cost of certification fees, you've got two
Minutes, two minutes left.
Okay. And I also think the risk, the risk categorization.
I think that in reality, plumbing
and drain laying is a high risk part of a building.
It directly affects, um, public health
and environmental health.
Uh, and I think self-certification I think is not the right
part of the system to approach in my view.
Um, I have got a few recommended suggestions
to improve the bill as it's written,
but happy to answer any questions
while we've still got two minutes.
Okay. Look, uh, we've got a minute in a bit.
So Simon, you have a question?
Oh, thank you Mr. Chair. Alright. Uh, thanks Ross.
Um, helpful to get your perspective.
I guess I'm interested in, um, how many,
uh, examples have there been
where failures haven't been detected?
And these things that you've described have manifested
themselves because, you know, is this a regular occurrence?
Is this something that, um, that, you know,
self-certification could help improve
or, you know, uh, uh, council's the only ones
who can pick this stuff up.
Okay. Ross?
Uh, I think defect defects
and plumbing systems are, are common.
Some of it will be them coming to the end of life
and you'll get leaks and things going wrong as,
as materials age.
But defects during new construction is also,
I would say relatively common, even in, in some situations,
even with the building consent authority inspections.
But what the inspections do is it's a second pair
of eyes essentially looking over these systems
before they're hidden away.
And that picks up defects at that point in time.
So with the building consent authority inspections regime,
as it stands, it does find defects and plumbing
and drainage systems, and they do get resolved
before buildings are completed and they're occupied.
So if you remove a second pair of eyes looking over them,
you there will, there will be more
defects that will slip through.
Ross, look, thank you. I'm sorry.
I think we'd like to ask some more questions,
but, um, we do, we are at time.
So, but really appreciate that and thank you very much.
You've given us some things to think about. Thanks, Ross.
Thank you. Okay.
Um, we're gonna change tack but not change tack
because we're now going to the building
and construction sector strength.
Think occupational licensing.
I'm not, never quite sure why we have opportunity together,
but that's the way it is.
Uh, and our first, um, submission is last plumber again. So
you reverse the stop.
Okay. You know the deal. Yeah. Let's
Straight, straight into it.
I might not introduce myself here.
You might know who I'm, I think we've got that minutes ago.
Um, look, overall master plumber support the bill,
the intention to improve the complaints
and disciplinary process occupational licensee.
However, there's aspects of the bill that require refinement
to ensure a fair and functional system for our industry.
The overall plumbing business in New Zealand just
employ less than three people.
Most are small owner operator businesses.
So while higher standards report must be clear, practical,
and also workable for small firms.
First I'd like to address the mandatory code of ethics.
We support the in introduction of the code of ethics
as it provides a clearer behavioral expectation
for practi practitioners
and strengths of consumer protection.
The code must though reflect modern standards
and remain practical for businesses of all sizes.
It should be written clearly
and supported by education and communication.
And if the requirements are too ambiguous, uh,
then it'll create uncertainty for practitioners too.
If it's too prescriptive, then it'll make difficult
for small businesses to meet the proposed standards.
I'll hand over to Lisa.
So I'll be talking to several of the, um,
proposed changes including in the bill, um, on the point
of expanded investigatory powers, um, including the ability
to enter work sites and in some cases household units
or Mariah with consent or warrant.
We support strong oversight where public health
and safety are at risk.
At the same time, it is important these powers are exercised
professionally and transparently.
Practitioners need to clearly understand their rights
and obligations during investigations,
and investigators need appropriate guidance
and training to ensure processes are fair entrusted
by both industry and the public.
Um, regarding the transparency of disciplinary hearing, uh,
histories, uh, the publication of suspension, uh,
suspensions and cancellations for a period of three years,
um, increases accountability and consumer visibility.
Uh, however we recommend that decisions are published
with appropriate context
so the public can understand the nature
and seriousness of the issue.
Uh, we also believe there should be clear pathways
for practitioners to retrain and return to work
after sanctions have been met.
Um, regarding the appeal provisions, um,
the bill proposes new appeal rights, allowing members
of the public to challenge decisions
where the register has determined a complaint is frivolous,
or an investigator finds a complaint
should not be brought to the board.
These new provisions do run the risk
of undermining the authority, integrity
of the investigative process,
and can lead to unnecessary delays
and inefficiencies without proportionate benefit
to consumers or practitioners.
Um, complaints already go through a proper triage
and investigation process,
and costs are ultimately born by license holders.
Um, so we do recommend those appeal provisions be removed.
Um, it is also important to acknowledge the interaction
with risk-based consenting and self-certification.
This bill sits alongside wider reforms, uh,
around risk-based consenting, uh, for low risk plumbing
and drain laying work for these reforms
to work safely and effectively.
It is essential that low risk
and straightforward work is clearly defined tech,
technically accurate,
and applied consistently across all councils.
Um, it is important that the complaints
and disciplinary process is aligned
with these wider changes to the sector.
Okay, so I probably also want to talk about what is most
concerning and that's the exemption
or unqualified person that's currently in the build.
So sections 1921
and 25 of the PTY Act currently allow
unqualified individuals to perform sanitary plumbing,
gas fitting, drain line work
under supervision without being regulated by the PGD board.
And Josh, you can provide some examples of this.
So the general I've always considered the general idea
of this is that it gives you the ability to hire someone
for a couple of months
before running them into an apprenticeship
to check they're gonna fit.
Um, most decent quality companies will just put someone into
an apprenticeship straight away.
Um, the usage I've seen of the exemption is more
to have one certifier sitting over top of a large amount
of exemption holders doing a lot of work
that they should not necessarily be doing
with no training qualification.
And it makes it harder for the board to interact
with those unsupervised people.
They can only interact with that certifying supervisor.
Mm. So to to, to clarify, um, unqualified, um,
persons under those exemptions are not subject
to the complaints processes, disciplinary action,
competence reviews, or continuing professional development
requirements, uh, that the board sets for.
So look, to summarize,
everyone carrying out regulated work should be properly
qualified and subject to the same standards.
The the current bill doesn't address the exemption class
and it needs to, so in conclusion, we,
we would like clear communication to the industry,
a practical and proportional requirements alignment
with a risk-based consenting form
and the removal provisions
that undermine the licensing brain.
We welcome continued engagement with MB and the PGT board.
Thank you for time. Happy to answer any questions.
Okay, thank you. We've got just under five minutes to go.
I've got Celia, ENA, and um, Simon.
And if we can please, um, no prefacing for our questions.
Silent.
Um, No, no, no, no. Celia first. Celia first. Simon.
Simon, Celia. Oh, sorry.
Celia's asking questions. He was just,
Sorry, was pre I thought he was prefacing
My question. No,
I was, make sure you didn't preface
it. Why you go, Celia,
Thank you very much.
Um, I was interested as to the scale of, um,
unqualified coming wood in general and
or just bad plumbers in the past.
Um, having been involved with assessing some
of the cross connections between stormwater
and sewage, some of it is on the public pipe for sure,
but there was a significant amount of cross connections
where stormwater overwhelmed the sewage system
and that one of the reasons that our harbor
and our remaining streams
and like a fur stream are not
what they should be more to quality.
Um, how do you feel that this bill
will help improve those, um, cross connections
or make them more likely?
Uh, look, I I think there's always, uh, opportunities
to educate the sector
and make sure that we are reducing the risk.
Um, we've moved to a moderate society
where we're all using phones and apps
and part of the self-certification ra regime is recording
the work that is done we haven't previously done.
And taking photographic evidence, what that means is
that we'll have a process where, uh,
historic work will be able to be identified easily
and then, uh, activated to those practitioners who have been
outside the scope of work.
So I think we're actually improving the scheme
through digital commun uh, communications.
Four Questions. Um, is it easy enough for, um,
professionals, uh, to complain about other professionals
who have done work that is not suitable
and should it be measured?
See, Josh wants to answer, Um,
I mean the complaints process,
So probably some, some professions it is mandatory.
You must complain. Yeah.
Um, I mean, I attempted to
run a complaint a few months ago.
Um, it's quite an exhaustive list, including, you know,
you've gotta give them, um, as much information as possible.
The homeowner's, uh, phone numbers, email addresses,
whether you've contacted them or not.
Um, there's quite a lot involved with making a complaint.
I I think one of the issues is plumber A
to plumber B is reluctant to New Zealand culture to do that.
The problem about the current pg d act,
it doesn't allow the regulator
to instigate a investigation without a complaint.
So they should be able to get some information
and then activate a complaint themselves
and that would stop the cultural law that happens around,
It's a small sector as well.
So yeah, everyone knows each other in some ways.
Yeah. Okay. I think we got the picture. Okay.
Second question. Um, I might,
I might give you two Two and then I'll have to go to Simon.
Okay. What about, um, customer care and language barriers?
Um, how does Phil deal with the reality that, um,
like you've got people practicing the sector
that need multiple languages
or in mostly in one language that isn't English.
Um, do we have the settings right
that we're getting the right kind of professional oversight
for those people and, um, the people who they will
Inevitably need to interact with in that language?
Um, look, I think our apprentice scheme has been under
pressure with the construction downturn.
There's no doubt about that.
And we need to grow the diversity, not just females,
but also a wider, uh,
diverse community in the plumbing sector.
There's no doubt about that.
We've had some growth in the area,
but outside that we are struggling
to expand our diversity coming through the sector.
Okay. We've got just under a minute left, Simon.
Um, why do you need a code of ethics?
Uh, other submitters have pointed out that, um,
simply an opportunity
to introduce a political correctness test into, uh,
who should be allowed to practice. What do you say to that?
Look, it's just giving clear guidelines
for the regulator about the police.
We're working consumer's home.
We're a trusted professional when we're
going into people's home.
Those code of ethics are not onerous. Right?
And, and that's consistency across the construction sector.
I don't think they're unreasonable
or burden the industry in any way.
And I expect 99.9% of the industry to be able to comply.
So what, um, what type
of behaviors do you think should be
regulated by a code of ethics?
Look, it's just about, um, uh, dealing with racism,
dealing around cultural diversity
and dealing with, uh, appropriate language
and behavior when you are in someone's home.
That's why other submitters have said it sounds like an
opportunity for PC police.
Oh, don't agree. It's just, uh, lifting the standards,
the construction sector, which I
believe, uh, we should support.
Thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
Again, you've given us more, more things to think about.
Okay. That takes us back
to board.
Well back again.
Thank you. Okay. Again, take us red.
I'll put it down for 10 minutes. I'll
give you a yell at four minutes to go.
And, um, time is yours.
So Luke, from my mistake earlier, I'll try
and make enough time for questions at the end.
Um, and just wanting to recognize
that the bill submissions today actually pretty much echo
the submission that you've just heard from Master Plumbers.
Um, the board does support the aim of the bill
to strengthen profession, uh, provisions in the plumbers,
gas fitters and drain layers act,
and to improve disciplinary processes in a way
that enhances public protection.
Provided the tools and the powers are proportionate
to the accountability expected of the board.
Um, the board isn't particular concerned
with one clause in the bill,
which we consider imposes a significant burden without
improving accountability.
Um, which is the ability to, um,
appeal against the decision of the registrar.
Um, and I'll talk to that in a little bit more detail.
Uh, we do support the introduction of a code of ethics.
We consider that it has the potential to lift standards, uh,
to enhance professionalism and to improve public protection.
Um, and we can take you through some examples of behavior
that we haven't been able to regulate, uh, in terms
of not having the current disciplinary, um, provisions
to allow us to address that behavior.
Um, we do have some concerns though with, uh,
the introduction of the existing code of ethics
that applies to builders.
And we understand that there is, uh, consistency
that is wanted to be applied across electrical workers,
plumbers, gas ERs, and drainers and builders.
Uh, we think that it is a useful reference point,
the code of ethics for builders.
But we do think that there are some limitations with how
that coder is currently drafted.
It is broad consumer focused
and contains obligations that are difficult to evidence
and enforce in our submissions.
Um, we also want the ability to be able
to set our own standards.
Um, that is important for us given our regulatory knowledge
and understanding of trade practices.
And it's critical that we are involved in
developing the code of ethics.
We are separate, we do stand alone.
We are not within mb, which is obviously, um, where builders
and the electrical workers sit.
Um, we think that we have, um, that knowledge
to be able to set that standard.
We also want to be able to be, um, able to respond quickly
to concerns that we are seeing
and proportionately to emerging issues.
And if that is difficult to, uh,
amend, then we are not agile.
And that's one of the key, uh, tasks of being a regulator.
We do not, uh, support the introduction of the new powers
of appeal under the act, which would allow a person
to appeal the board decision, um, by the registrar
to termin their complaint as frivolous or vexatious.
Uh, and we also do not support, uh, the appeal provision
of an investigator, uh, finding that a complaint
or part of a complaint should not be considered.
Further. We consider
that these proposals are disproportionate
and will not improve accountability in a meaningful way.
There's no practical need for an appeal, right?
Relating to decisions
that a complaint is frivolous or vexatious.
We haven't, um, had, uh, we've only used
that provision once in 13 years.
True. Um, more fundamentally, an appeal of a decision not
to proceed to a hearing is problematic on both principles
and operational grounds.
It misunderstands the board's jurisdiction,
which is concerned with wider public health
and safety rather than individual consumer disputes.
Uh, it also places unreasonable
and unfunded cost burdens on all practitioners
who fees would fund this new process.
So it introduces an unnecessary administrative complexity.
Um, it delays investigations
and materially increases cost across the system without
improving practitioner accountability.
Uh, creates a new grievance mechanism for complainants
that is funded by practitioners,
which is a significant departure from
standard regulatory design.
And we also think it undermines our existing pathways
and how we do manage complaints,
which is including educational out outcomes
and formal warning processes.
And it really gives the complainant, uh,
another bite at the chair using practitioner's money.
I'm gonna hand over to Martin who's going
to talk to you about exemptions.
So, um, similar to what Josh said earlier, you know, I,
anyone in this room can basically apply
for an exemption as of today.
Um, they will work under direct supervision from a tradesman
or certifying plumber gas fit and trailer.
There are some restrictions on the drain line, sorry,
on the gas fitting side around working
around life gas et However, we, we need the flexibility
of having a license similar to that.
But what we need as a board, we need that to have the same,
uh, oversight as what a tradesman is,
where we need them to do upskilling.
We need 'em to, um, own their decisions
and be accountable as a discipline, uh,
and be able to be able to accountable
for disciplinary function.
The current act does not allow us to do that,
hence we wanna replace the current, uh,
exemption license with something, uh,
within the tent as such.
So, um, you know, the,
the other, um, aspect of having a
good regime around, um, oversight
of what practitioners should abide to.
Uh, we had a case recently where, um,
fraudulent behavior was taken into account
during the investigation.
We couldn't remove his license, um, as across the plumbing,
gas and drain lane part of his business
'cause uh, we were only charged
with the gas fitting portion of it.
Uh, and yet under, um, having the code of F effects,
we should have been able to remove his full license,
but just of on full moon.
Yeah. So that would broaden the sense and,
and consumer protection by having a wider, um,
look at across the behavior of the person rather than the,
um, breaking of a rule as such.
So, question. Okay. Right, Simon.
Right? So just come back to the code of ethics.
If fraud is criminal activity, um,
why do you need this code of ethics to tell you
that it's criminal and
that person's not a fit and proper person?
I mean, can't you just apply the same standard, Hey,
somebody's committed a crime or they've offend
that they've defrauded a client with a company
or work for, um, isn't that sufficient?
Can we detail the alleged
to make it sufficient without you having
to introduce this bully code of ethics concept?
The legislation is currently drafted only allows you
consider fraudulent behavior
when they're carrying out their work.
So it's limited to a practitioner carrying out the functions
in terms of I've been doing Right.
That work. So it, it doesn't, it doesn't expand to that.
The other examples we've got is, um, for example,
we've had practitioners cheat on
their certifying examinations.
Um, we are not able to respond to that.
Yeah, we have no legislative powers that allow us to respond
to I think deceptive behavior.
We've had a practitioner assault, um, a council inspector.
We are not, we can't respond to that.
Again, it has to go through a criminal process.
We don't have any tools that allow us
to address that behavior.
And I'm not saying that that behavior would necessarily mean
that that practitioner wouldn't be allowed
to practice in their trade.
They just may be con conditions
that we would place on their license depending on
the seriousness of that.
Okay. Um, Mr. Chair, just follow
Other Question. Um,
so would those matters not better be covered by fit
and proper person test to hold?
Um, practitioners, uh, license
The legislation doesn't allow us to consider even that
as a, a fit and proper unless there are obviously
convictions that arise out of that offending. Okay.
That's Really helpful. I think also there is, um,
comparisons to be made
to other occupational regulator professions.
Um, doctors, social workers, teachers all have a code
of ethics in terms of their professionalism.
I don't see why plumbers gas fitters
and drain layers when they do have the ability
to go into people's homes, um, which by their very nature,
you know, is, um, your protected space,
that there shouldn't be any kind of expected, um, behaviors
that we would want our plumbers, gas fitters
and drain lays to be complying within the people's homes.
Like not going into people's spreads
and, you know, making sure that they're not going
bathroom out in the garden, for example.
I just clarify, are there different ethical standards
that apply to doctors, Simon engineers and plumbers?
Or don't, shouldn't we just be a generally accepted code
of ethics based on common law and statutes?
Why do you need this additional definition of do?
I'm not saying that we need an additional definition.
I'm saying that there's a comparison that you could draw
to other professions that also have a code
of ethics obligation that they must comply
with in terms being a professional.
I'm gonna stop that one there, but I do wanna ask you,
you, you did mention that issue about your ability
to discipline when you, your first submission,
you were talking about the things that you needed.
One of them was the ability to be able to register,
de-register, et cetera.
Uh, and um, so are you saying that the moment,
the current arrangement, you do not have enough
tools to be able to do that?
So there, there are advances in this legislation,
but there are other things which you need
which need to be fixed as
Well. Correct. But yes.
Yeah. Okay. No, that's, that's helpful. Thank you.
Um, right. I know, um,
Same questions.
Uh, why isn't it mandatory for comments to raise, um, issues
that they notice in practice that have, um, with work
that's been carried out by other one?
Uh, so for example,
in the Health Practitioner's Competence Insurance Act,
there is an obligation on doctors when they become, um,
sorry, I used to work at the medical council, which is,
I'm using that as a comparative.
Um, there is an obligation that when you do become concerns
around a doctor's competency
that you must notify the medical council.
We do not have that provision in our legislation.
Is that good? Uh, yes.
I do think though, as Greg mentioned
before, the ability for the registrar
to self-initiate a complaint, um, will, will help address
that issue and that we'll will be able
to self-initiate without having a
actual complaint from a practitioner.
We're gonna leave. We're gonna leave it there.
Thank you very much. Really appreciate that.
Again, you've given quite a
lot to think about, so good stuff.
Right. Okay. Um, Dr. John McDonald WA who is on Zoom?
John, are you there? Thank you.
No, John.
He is in right.
Hello John, your honor, can't, can't see you.
If you can put your, uh, um, uh, there we go. Right?
Sort of. Yep. Got you there. Right. Okay.
Um, we've got you there. Five minutes.
You can take your submission as read, uh,
anything you wanna highlight, go for, go for your life.
Um, I'll give you a call at two minutes just in
case you wanna ask some questions.
So, uh, in your time it starts now.
Um, my main concern with this bill is it represents a
potential shift from
licensing based on technical competency,
which is a good thing towards licensing
and disciplinary procedures,
potentially being based on political correctness
of the tradesperson.
Um, so there's two aspects of this.
One is that they're changing the board members.
So the boards are already political appointees.
There is, um, claims that they're independent,
but it's effectively the executive branch putting these
board members in place.
And currently it's heavily weighted towards board members
who have technical competency
and have been educating plumbers and drain layers
and gas fitters or veterans of the industry.
This seems to be a change towards a lot more just purely
political appointees, um, which is concerning combining that
with the code of ethics,
which there's little definition in this bill about what
that code of ethics will actually entail,
but it seems to be a political code of ethics decided
ultimately by the executive branch, governor General
and minister, deciding what that code of ethics is gonna be
and then that is gonna be imposed on these various
tradespeople, um, that is right for political
abuse in the future.
Um, and we have seen that
with other professional boards, um, nurses, medical council,
um, teachers, um, being
persecuted by their professional licensing boards based on
political opinions that they have expressed on social media,
whether it's criticism of politicians
or criticism of policy ultimate.
And often, um, it could be unrelated
to their actual profession.
This is their personal opinions.
Um, also concerning from that perspective is
enabling the registrar of the board to initiate complaints.
So the scenario I envisioned as being potentially, um,
troublesome is the registrar
and their staff are having a board, uh,
slow workday and uh, trolling social media
to find a plumber who has said something offensive
that they view as offensive on the internet
and then they can initiate disciplinary procedures against
that plumber or that gas fitter.
So rather than them being able to keep their job
and their right to work based on technical competency,
there's a danger that with this, um, code of ethics,
they could be, um, persecuted
and lose their right to work based on
having a political opinion.
John, you've got two minutes next. Um, don't approve of.
Um, so this is Wellington imposing their ethics
on tradies around the country.
Um, I think alternatively we should probably have, um,
the ethics of tradies being imposed on Wellington
and we might get more of Wellington bureaucrats, um,
calling a spade a spade.
Um, projects might be completed on time and on budget.
Instead, we're gonna have Wellington bureaucracy in its
various forms imposing their ethics on tradespeople.
Um, and that shift away from competence.
And we want tradespeople focusing on making sure gas
fittings aren't leaking
and making sure that sewage isn't flowing
through people's houses
and down the street, not worrying about whether they are
complying with whatever wind direction the wind is blowing
down in Wellington In terms of acceptable. John,
We've got one minute left.
Alright, um, that's my main point.
The other one is about the inspection
of third party private property.
I'm not sure why a third party should be dragged into a
dispute between a licensed trades person and their board.
If that third party hasn't complained about the quality
of work, why should their property be inspected
based on a dispute that they're not involved of?
They don't personally have a problem with the tradies work
and are not making a complaint
and wanting a disciplinary action.
Why should they be dragged into it
and have their privacy of their property
and invaded for an investigation
that they're not a party to? Yep, that's
Good. Okay,
good. John, thank you very much.
Um, we've only got about 15 seconds
and I'm not gonna take a question out.
I just gonna ask about a fit, a proper person.
No, otherwise gonna run out of time for the next one.
We're slightly behind. Alright, John, thank you very much.
Really appreciate it. Thank you, John. Alright, max, max,
max, welcome.
We've got your submission, which take us read,
I've got you down for five minutes, um, as an individual
and your time starts now.
I'll, I'll give you a yell when there's two minutes to go.
Hi there. Um, thank you.
Um, chair, chair, um, chairman, uh, members
of the panel.
First I take my, um, my, um, submission as read.
First of, firstly, I wanna say that I'm willing to be wrong.
I understand the exclusivity of
client relations for plumbing.
The plumbing industry may seem radical in the,
in the in thought to others.
My view supports a commonality, a public interest
of the important work as it relates to health.
I understand that one of the purposes
of plumbing is to provide health.
I think there is an overwhelming importance
of public interest over this matter
and light of this.
The tradit, the traditional concept of how plumbing work
and the social relationship is seen by by us may need
to change again.
I'm grateful, like always for the opportunity to contribute
to the discussion.
A structure like a regulatory board is no guarantee
of performance.
We have, we have structures over many different fields.
Many look at these structures
and feel that, that they do not work,
including ones in involved in housing.
Where if we are trying to appro approve the work
to certain standard, to certain standards
by relying just on good faith, the contractor's training
and qualification should be acceptable for the job.
Why would we impose another standard
upon them for their work?
People in many instances
who use qualified plumbers do not have a problem.
One might ask why do they need to be selfer certified?
But equally in the circumstance of a job, uh,
where a non non self-certified plumber is used.
It may not not be a problem if the job is, is a good job.
But then if it's a bad job, are we
to say then it is the customer's fault for not hiring one
who is self certified.
I think this is unreasonable. The bill fails in two ways.
First, it relies on good faith.
I argue that it is too, that too much is at stake
for the system to rely on this alone.
Self certification does not guarantee good
workmanship by itself.
It does not look in the instances where a person's intent.
Both the customer read, client bracket
and the plumbers, uh, are configured inside,
uh, um, inside saving money.
And the solution provided is a shortcut solution over a,
an accepted choice taking here the two rational agents.
Thanks, we got two minutes left is not the best one
to use because of motive.
The decision around the management we have seen
around the removal of water,
especially if the information was ignored, has seen tragedy
where the public interest
and health consideration has been ignored
or not, not factor, not a factor considered due to cost.
The customer's intent
to save money using a certain choice may come up to code
but lead to other problems.
The second part of the bill would remove the responsibility
of councils for inspecting jobs.
I see this as a res recipe for disaster.
It allows building consent authorities to get off the hook,
which they have been trying to do anyways.
The burden no doubt would fall, then fall on the customer.
The subject is a matter
of public interest producing legislation, which is driven
by cost alone, does not lead to good law making.
And my question is,
how does protecting the building consent authorities from
liability not mean that the customer's left
with the financial burden?
Max, thank you. We've got about a minute left.
Does anybody have any questions? Don't see.
I think that's very clear. So thank you.
Really appreciate it. Thanks Max. Thank you.
Appreciate your time. Thank you.
Okay, well look, thank you um, everyone for, um,
those submissions and to the officials for listening in.
There's a number of things, obviously, um, we've, um,
been told that, uh, are gonna require some thought.
So.